Page326APPENDIX
DR. AMBEDKAR'S LAST SPEECH IN THE CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY
ON ADOPTION OF THE CONSTITUTION
(NOVEMBER 25, 1949)
The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : Sir, looking back on the work of
the Constituent Assembly it will now be two years, eleven months and
seventeen days since it first met on the 9th of December 1946. During this
period the Constituent Assembly has altogether held eleven sessions. Out of
these eleven sessions the first six were spent in passing the ejectives
Resolution and the consideration of the Reports of Committees on
Fundamental Rights, on Union Constitution, on Union Powers, on Provincial
Constitution, on Minorities and on the Scheduled Areas and Scheduled
Tribes. The seventh, eighth, ninth, tenth and the eleventh sessions were
devoted to the consideration of the Draft Constitution. These eleven
sessions of the Constituent Assembly have consumed 165 days. Out of these,
the Assembly spent 114 days for the consideration of the Draft Constitution.
Coming to the Drafting Committee, it was elected by the Constituent
Assembly on 29th August 1947. It held its first meeting on 30th August. Since
August 30th it sat for 141 days during which it was engaged in the
preparation of the Draft Constitution. The Draft Constitution as prepared
by the Constitutional Adviser as a text for the Draft Committee to work
upon consisted of 243 articles and 13 Schedules. The first Draft Constitution
as presented by the Drafting Committee to the Constituent Assembly
contained 315 articles and 8 Schedules. At the end of the consideration
stage, the number of articles in the Draft Constitution increased to 386. In
its final form, the Draft Constitution contains 395 articles and 8 Schedules.
The total number of amendments to the Draft Constitution tabled was
approximately 7,635. Of them, the total number of amendments actually
moved in the House was 2,473.
I mention these facts because at one stage it was being said that the
Assembly had taken too long a time to finish its work, that it was going on
leisurely and wasting the public money. It was said to be a case of Nero
fiddling while Rome was burning. Is there any justification for this
Page327complaint? Let us note the time the consumed by Constituent Assemblies in
other countries appointed for framing their Constitutions. To take a few
illustrations, the American Convention met on May 25th 1787 and completed
its work on September 17, 1787 i.e., within four months. The Constitutional
Convention of Canada met on the 10th October 1864 and the Constitution
was passed into law in March 1867 involving a period of two years and five
months. The Australian Constitutional Convention assembled in March 1891
and the Constitution became law on the 9
th July 1900, consuming a period
of nine years. The South African Convention met in October, 1908 and the
Constitution became law on the 20th September 1909 involving one year's
labour. It is true that we have taken more time than what the American or
South African Conventions did. But we have not taken more time than the
Canadian Convention and much less than the Australian Convention. In
making comparisons on the basis of time consumed, two things must be
remembered. One is that the Constitutions of America, Canada, South
Africa and Australia are much smaller than ours. Our Constitution as I said
contains 395 articles while the American has just seven articles, the first
four of which are divided into sections which total up to 21, the Canadian
has 147, Australian 128 and South African 153 sections. The second thing to
be remembered is that the makers of the Constitutions of America, Canada,
Australia and South Africa did not have to face the problem of
amendments. They were passed as moved. On the other hand, this
Constituent Assembly had to deal with as many as 2.473 amendments.
Having regard to these facts the charge of dilatoriness seems to me quite
unfounded and this Assembly may well congratulate itself for having
accomplished so formidable a task in so short a time.
Turning to the quality of the work done by the Drafting Committee,
Mr. Naziruddin Ahmed felt it his duty to condemn it outright. In his opinion,
the work done by the Drafting Committee is not only not worthy of
commendation, but is positively below par. Everybody has a right to have
his opinion about the work done by the Drafting Committee and Mr.
Naziruddin is welcome to have his own. Mr. Naziruddin Ahmed thinks he is a
man of greater talents than any member of the Drafting Committee. The
drafting Committee does not wish to challenge his claim, on the other
hand. The Drafting Committee would have welcomed him in their midst if
the Assembly had thought him worthy of being appointed to it. If he had no
Page328place in the making of the Constitution it is certainly not the fault of the
Drafting Committee.
Mr. Naziruddin Ahmed has coined a new name for the Drafting
Committee evidently to show his contempt for it. He calls it a Drifting
committee. Mr. Naziruddin must no doubt be pleased with his hit. But he
evidently does not know that there is a difference between drift without
mastery and drift with mastery. If the Drafting Committee was drifting, it
was' never without mastery over the situation. It was not merely angling
with the off chance of catching a fish. It was searching in known waters to
find the fish it was after. To be in search of something better is not the
same as drifting. Although Mr. Naziruddin Ahmed did not mean it as a
compliment to the Drafting committee, I take it as a compliment to the
Drafting Committee. The Drafting Committee would have been guilty of
gross dereliction of duty and of a false sense of dignity if it had not shown
the honesty and the courage to withdraw the amendments which it
thought faulty and substitute what it thought was better. If it is a mistake, I
am glad that the Drafting Committee did not fight shy of admitting such
mistakes and coming forward to correct them.
I am glad to find that with the exception of a solitary member, there
is a general consensus of appreciation from the members of the Constituent
Assembly of the work done by the Drafting Committee. I am sure the
Drafting Committee feels happy to find this spontaneous recognition of its
labours expressed in such generous terms. As to the compliments that have
been showered upon me both by the members of the Assembly as well as
by my colleagues of the Drafting Committee I feel so overwhelmed that I
cannot find adequate words to express fully my gratitude to them. I came
into the Constituent Assembly with no greater aspiration than to safeguard
the interests of he Scheduled Castes. I had not the remotest idea that I
would be called upon to undertake more responsible functions. I was
therefore greatly surprised when the Assembly elected me to the Drafting
Committee. I was more than surprised when the Drafting Committee
elected me to be its Chairman. There were in the Drafting Committee men
bigger, better and more competent than myself such as my friend Sir Alladi
KrishnasWami Ayyar. I am grateful to the Constituent Assembly and the
Drafting Committee for reposing in me so much trust and confidence and to
Page329have chosen me as their instrument and given me this opportunity of
serving the country. (Cheers.)
The credit that is given to me does not really belong to me. It belongs
partly to Sir B.N. Rau, the Constitutional Adviser to the Constituent
Assembly who prepared a rough draft of the Constitution for the
consideration of the Drafting Committee. A part of the credit must go to
the members of the Drafting Committee who, as I have said, have sat for 141
days and without whose ingenuity of devise new formulae and capacity to
tolerate and to accommodate different points of view, the task of framing
the Constitution could not have come to so successful a conclusion. Much
greater, share of the credit must go to Mr. S.N. Mukherjee, the Chief
Draftsman of the constitution. His ability to put the most intricate
proposals in the simplest and clearest legal form can rarely be equalled, nor
his capacity for hard work. "He has been as acquisition to the Assembly.
Without his help, this Assembly would have taken many more years to
finalise the Constitution. I must not omit to mention the members of the
staff working under Mr. Mukherjee. For, I know how hard they have worked
and how long they have toiled sometimes even beyond midnight. I want to
thank them all for their effort and their co- operation. (Cheers.)
The task of the Drafting Committee would have been a very difficult
one if this Constituent Assembly has been merely a motely crowd, a
tessellated pavement without cement, a black stone here and a white stone
there is which each member or each group was a law unto itself. There
would have been nothing but chaos. This possibility of chaos was reduced
to nil by the existence of the Congress Party inside the Assembly which
brought into its proceedings a sense of order and discipline. It is because of
the discipline of the Congress Party that the Drafting Committee was able
to pilot the Constitution in the Assembly with the sure knowledge as to
the fate of each article and each amendment. The Congress Party is,
therefore, entitled to all the credit for the smooth sailing of the Draft
Constitution in the Assembly.
The proceedings of this Constituent Assembly would have been very
dull if all members had yielded to the rule of party discipline. Party
discipline, in all its rigidity, would have converted this Assembly into a
gathering of yes' men. Fortunately, there were rebels. They were Mr.
Page330Kamath, Dr. PS. Deshmukh, Mr. Sidhva, Prof. Saxena & Pandit Thakur, Das
Bhargava alongwith they I must mention Prof. K.T Shah and Pandit Hirday
Nath Kunzru. The points they raised were mostly ideological. That I was
not prepared to accept their suggestions does not diminish the value of
their suggestions nor lessen the service they have rendered to the
Assembly in enlivening its proceedings. I am grateful to them. But for
them, I would not have had the opportunity which I got for expounding
the principles underlying the Constitution which was more important than
the mere mechanical work of passing the Constitution.
Finally, I must thank you Mr. President for the way in which you
have conducted the proceedings of this Assembly. The courtesy and the
consideration which you have shown to the Members of the Assembly can
never be forgotten by those who have taken part in the proceedings of
this Assembly. There were occasions when the amendments of the
Drafting Committee were sought to be barred on grounds purely technical
in their nature. Those were very anxious moments for me. I am, therefore,
especially grateful to you for not permitting legalism to defeat the work
of Constitution-making.
As much defence as could be offered to the constitution has been
offered by my friends Sir Alladi Krishnaswami Ayyar and Mr. TT
Krishnamachari. I shall not therefore enter into the merits of the
Constitution. Because I feel, however good a Constitution may be, it is sure
to turn out bad because those who are called to work it, happen to be a
bad lot. However bad a Constitution may be, it may turn out to be good if
those who are called to work it, happen to be a good lot. The working of a
Constitution does not depend wholly upon the nature of the Constitution.
The Constitution can provide only the organs of State such as the
Legislature, the Executive and the Judiciary. The factors on which the
working of those organs of the State depends are the people and the
political parties they will set up as their instruments to carry out their
wishes and their politics. Who can say how the people of India and their
purposes or will they prefer revolutionary methods of achieving them? If
they adopt the revolutionary methods, however good the Constitution
may be, it requires no prophet to say that it will fail. It is, therefore, futile
Page331to pass any judgement upon the Constitution without reference to the
part which the people and their parties are likely to play.
The condemnation of the Constitution largely comes from two
quarters, the Communist Party and the Socialist Party. Why do they
condemn the Constitution? Is it because it is really a bad Constitution? I
venture to say no'. The Communist Party want a Constitution based upon
the principle of the Dictatorship of the Proletariat. They condemn the
Constitution because it is based upon parliamentary democracy. The
Socialists want two things. The first thing they want is that if they come in
power, the Constitution must give them the freedom to nationalize or
socialize all private property without payment of compensation. The
second thing that the Socialists want is that the Fundamental Rights
mentioned in the Constitution must be absolute and without any
limitations so that if their Party fails to come into power, they would have
the unfettered freedom not merely to criticize, but also to overthrow the
State.
These are the main grounds on which the Constitution is being
condemned. I do not say that the principle of parliamentary democracy is
the only ideal form of political democracy. I do not say that the principle of
no acquisition of private property without' compensation is so sacrosanct
that there can be no departure from it. I do not say that Fundamental
Rights can never be absolute and the limitations set upon them can never
be lifted. What I do say is that the principles embodied in the Constitution
are the views of the present generation or if you think this to be an overstatement, I say they are the views of the members of the Constituent
Assembly. Why blame the Drafting Committee for embodying them in the
Constitution? I say why blame even the Members of the Constituent
Assembly? Jefferson, the great American statesman who played so great a
part in the making of the American constitution, has expressed some very
weighty views which makers of Constitution, can never afford to ignore. In
one place he has said:-
“We may consider each generation as a distinct nation, with a right, by
the will of the majority, to bind themselves, but none to bind the
succeeding generation, more than the inhabitants of another country”.
In another place, he has said:
Page332“The idea that institutions established for the use of the national
cannot be touched or modified, even to make them answer their end,
because of rights gratuitously supposed in those employed to manage
them in the trust for the public, may perhaps be a salutary provision
against the abuses of a monarch, but is most absurd against the nation
itself Yet our lawyers and priests generally inculcate this doctrine, and
suppose that preceding generations held the earth more freely than we do;
had a right to impose laws on us, unalterable by ourselves, and that we, in
the like manner, can make laws and impose burdens on future generations,
which they will have no right to alter; in fine, that the earth belongs to the
dead and not the living”.
I admit that what .Jefferson has said is not merely true, but is
absolutely true. There can tie no question about it. Had' the Constituent
Assembly departed from this principle laid down by Jefferson it would
certainly be liable to blame, even to condemnation. But I ask, has it? Quite
the contrary. One has only to examine the provision relating to the
amendment of the Constitution. The Assembly has not only refrained from
putting a seal of finality and infallibility upon this Constitution as in Canada
or by making the amendment of the Constitution subject to the fulfilment
of extraordinary terms and conditions as in America or Australia, but has
provided a most facile procedure for amending the Constitution. I challenge
any of the critics of the Constitution to prove that any Constituent
Assembly anywhere in the world has, in the circumstances in which this
country finds itself, provided such a facile procedure for the amendment of
the Constitution. If those who are dissatisfied with the Constitution have
only to obtain a 2/3 majority and if they .cannot obtain even a two-thirds
majority in the parliament elected on adult franchise in their favour, their
dissatisfaction with the Constitution cannot be deemed to be shared by the
general public.
There is only one point of constitutional import to which I propose to
make a reference. A serious complaint is made on the ground that there is
too much of centralization and that the States have been reduced to
Municipalities. It is clear that this view is not only an exaggeration, but is
also founded on a misunderstanding of what exactly the Constitution
contrives to do. As to the relation between the Centre and the States, it is
Page333necessary to bear in mind the fundamental principle on which it rests. The
basic principle of Federalism is that the Legislative and Executive authority
is partitioned between-the Centre and the States not by any law to be made
by the Centre but by the Constitution itself. This is what Constitution does.
The States under our Constitution are in no way dependent upon the Centre
for their legislative or executive authority. The Centre and the States are coequal in this matter. It is difficult to see how such a Constitution-can be called
centralism. It may be that the Constitution assigns to the Centre too large a
field for the operation of its legislative and executive authority than is to be
found in any other federal Constitution. It may be that the residuary powers
are given to the Centre and not to the States. But these features do not form
the essence of federalism. The chief mark of federalism as I said lies in the
partition of the legislative and executive authority between the Centre and
the Units by the Constitution. This is the principle embodied in our
constitution. There can be no mistake about it. It is, therefore, wrong to say
that the States have been placed under the Centre. Centre cannot by its own
will alter the boundary of that partition. Nor can the Judiciary. For as has
been well said:
“Courts may modify, they cannot replace. They can revise earlier
interpretations as new arguments, new points of view are presented, they
can shift the dividing line in marginal cases, but there are barriers they
cannot pass, definite assignments of power they cannot reallocate. They
can give a broadening construction of existing powers, but they cannot
assign to one authority powers explicitly granted to another”
The first charge of centralization defeating federalism must therefore
fall.
The second charge is that the Centre has been given the power to
override the States. This charge must be admitted. But before condemning
the Constitution for containing such overriding powers, certain
considerations must be borne in mind. The first is that these overriding
powers do not form the normal feature of the constitution. Their use and
operation are expressly confined to emergencies only. The second
consideration is: Could we avoid giving overriding powers to the Centre when
an emergency has arisen? Those who do not admit the justification for such
overriding powers to the Centre even in an emergency, do not seem to have a
Page334clear idea of the problem which lies at the root of the matter. The problem is
so clearly set out by a writer in that well-known magazine "The Round Table"
in its issue of December 1935 that I offer no apology for quoting the following
extract from it. Says the writer:
“Political systems are a complex of rights and duties resting
ultimately on the question, to whom, or to what authority. Does the
citizen owe allegiance? In normal affairs the question is not present, for the
law works smoothly, and a man, goes about his business obeying one
authority in this set of matters and another authority in that. But in a
moment of crisis, a conflict of claims may arise, and it is then apparent that
ultimate allegiance cannot be divided. The issue of allegiance cannot be
determined in the last resort by a juristic interpretation of statutes. The
law must conform to the facts or so much the worse for the law. When all
formalism is stripped away, the bare question is what authority commands
the residual loyalty of the citizen. Is it the Centre or the Constituent State?”
The solution of this problem depends upon one's answer to this
question which is the crux of the problem. There can be no doubt that in the
opinion of the vast majority of the people, the residual loyalty of the citizen in
an emergency must be to the Centre and not to the Constituent States. For it
is only the Centre which can work for a common end and for the general
interests of the country as a whole. Herein lies the justification for giving to all
Centre certain overriding powers to be used in an emergency. And after all
what is' the obligation imposed upon the Constituent States by these
emergency powers? No more than this - that in an emergency, they should
take into consideration alongside their own local interests, the opinions and
interests of the nation as a whole. Only those who have, but understood the
problem, can complain against it.
Here I could have ended. But my mind is so full of the future of our
country that I feel I ought to take this occasion to give expression to some
of my reflections thereon. On herJanuary 1950, India will be an independent
country (Cheers). What would happen to his independence? Will she
maintain her independence or will she lose it again? This is the first thought
that comes to my mind. It is not that India was never an independent
country. The point is that she once lost the independence she had. Will she
lose it a second time? It is this thought which makes me most anxious for
Page335the future. What perturbs me greatly is the fact -that not only India has
once before lost her independence, but -she lost it by the infidelity and
treachery of some of her own people. In the invasion of Sind by
Mahommed-Bin-Kasim, the military commanders of King Dahar accepted
bribes from the agents of Mahommed-Bin-Kasim and refused to fight on the
side of their King. It was Jaichand who invited Mahommed Gohri to invade
'India and fight against Prithvi Raj and promised him the help of himself and
the Solanki Kings. When Shivaji was fighting for the liberation of Hindus,
the other Maratha noblemen and the Rajput Kings were fighting the battle
on the side of Moghul Emperors. When the British were trying to destroy
the Sikh Rulers, Gulab Singh, their principal commander sat silent and did
not help to save the Sikh Kingdom. In 1857, when a large part of India had
declared a war of independence against the British, the Sikhs stood and
watched the event as silent spectators.
Will history repeat itself? It is this thought which fills me with
anxiety. This anxiety is deepened by the realization of the fact that in
addition to our old enemies in the form of castes and creeds .we are going
to have many political parties with diverse and opposing political creeds.
Will Indian place the country above their creed or will they place creed
above country? I do not know. But this much is certain that if the parties
place creed above country, our independence will be put in jeopardy a
second time and probably be lost for ever. This eventuality we must all
resolutely guard against. We must be determined to defend our
independence with the last drop of our blood.(Cheers.)
On the 26th of January 1950, India would be a democratic country in
the sense that India from that day would have a government of the people,
by the people and for the people. The same thought comes to my mind.
What would happen to her democratic Constitution? Will she be able to
maintain it or will she lost it again this is the second thought that comes to
my mind and makes me as anxious as the first.
It is not that India did not know what Democracy is. There was a time
when India was studded with republics, and even where there were
monarchies, they were either elected or limited. They were never absolute.
It is not that India did not know Parliaments or Parliamentary Procedure. A
study of the Buddhist Bhikshu Sanghas discloses that not only there were
Page336Parliaments-for the Sanghas were nothing but Parliaments - but the
Sanghas knew and observed all the rules of Parliamentary Procedure
known to modern times. They had rules regarding seating arrangements,
rules regarding Motions, Resolutions, Quorum, Whip, Counting of Votes,
Voting by Ballot, Censure Motion, Regularization, Res Judicata, etc.
Although these rules of Parliamentary Procedure were applied by the
Buddha to the meetings of the Sang has, he must have borrowed them
from the rules of the Political Assemblies functioning in the country in his
time.
This democratic system India lost. Will she lose it a second time? I do
not know. But-it is quite possible in a country like India - where democracy
from its long disuse must be regarded as something quite new - there is
danger of democracy giving place to dictatorship. It is quite possible for this
new born democracy to retain its form but give place to dictatorship in
fact. If there is a landslide, the danger of the second possibility becoming·
actuality is much greater.
If we wish to maintain democracy not merely in form, but also in
fact, what must we do? The first thing in my judgement we must do is to
hold fast to constitutional methods of achieving our social and economic
objectives. It means we must abandon the bloody methods of revolution.
It means that we must abandon the method of civil disobedience, noncooperation and satyagraha. When there was no way left for
constitutional methods for achieving economic and social objectives, there
was a great deal of justification for unconstitutional methods. But where
constitutional methods are open, there can be no justification for these
unconstitutional methods. These methods are nothing but the Grammar of
Anarchy and the sooner they are abandoned, the better for us.
The second thing we must do is to observe the caution which John
Stuart Mill has given to all who are interested in the maintenance of
democracy, namely, not “to lay their liberties at the feet of even a great
man, or to trust him with power which enable him to subvert their
institutions.”There is nothing wrong in being grateful to great men who
have rendered life-long services to the country. But there are limits to
gratefulness, As has been well said by the Irish Patriot Daniel O’Connell, no
man can be grateful at the cost of his honour, no woman can be grateful at
Page337the cost of her chastity and no nation can be grateful at the cost of its
liberty. This caution is far more necessary in the case of India than in the
case of any other country. For in India, Bhakti or what may be called the
path of devotion or hero-worship, plays a part in its politics unequalled in
magnitude by the part it plays in the politics of any other country in the
world. Bhakti in religion may be a road to the salvation of the soul. But in
politics, Bhakti or hero- worship is a sure road to degradation and to
eventual dictatorship.
The third thing we must do is not to be content with mere political
democracy. We must make our political democracy a social democracy as
well. Political democracy cannot last unless there lies at the base of it social
democracy. What does social democracy mean? It means a way of life
which recognizes liberty, equality and fraternity as the principles of life.
These principles of liberty, equality and fraternity as the principles of life.
These principles of liberty, equality and fraternity are not to be treated as
separate items in a trinity. They form a union of trinity in the sense that to
divorce one from the other is to defeat the very purpose of democracy.
Liberty cannot be divorced from equality, equality cannot be divorced
from liberty. Nor can liberty and equality be divorced from fraternity.
Without equality, liberty would produce the supremacy of the few over
the many. [Equality without liberty would kill individual initiative.]
Without fraternity, liberty would produce the supremacy of the few over
the many. [Equality without liberty would kill individual initiative.]
Without fraternity, liberty and equality could not become a natural course
of things. It would require a constable to enforce them. We must begin by
acknowledging the fact that there is complete absence of two things in
Indian Society. One of these is equality. On the social plane, we have in
India a society based on the principle of graded inequality which we have a
society in which there are some who have immense wealth as against many
who live in abject poverty. On the 26th of January 1950, we are going to
enter into a life of contradictions. In politics we will have equality and in
social and economic life we will have inequality. In politics we will be
recognizing the principle of one man one vote and one vote one value. In
our social and economic life, we shall, by reason of our social and economic
structure, continue to deny the principle of one man one value. How long
shall we continue to live this life of contradictions? How long shall we
Page338continue to deny equality in our social and economic life? If we continue to
deny it for long, we will do so only by putting our political democracy in
peril. We must remove this contradiction at the earliest possible moment or
else those who suffer from inequality will blow up the structure of political
democracy which is Assembly has to laboriously built up.
The second thing we are wanting in is recognition of the principle of
fraternity. What does fraternity mean? Fraternity means a sense of common
brotherhood of all Indians-if Indians being one people. It is the principle
which gives unity and solidarity to social life. It is a difficult thing to achieve.
How difficult it is, can be realized 'from the story related by James Bryce in
his volume on American Commonwealth about the United States of
America.
The story is- I propose to recount it in the words of Bryce himselfthat-
“Some years ago the American Protestant Episcopal Church was
occupied at its triennial Convention in revising its liturgy. It was thought
desirable to introduce among the short sentence prayers a prayer for the
whole people, and an eminent New England divine proposed the words ‘O’
Lord, bless our nation'. Accepted one afternoon, on the spur of the
moment, the sentence was brought up next day for reconsideration, when
so many objections were raised by the laity to the word nation' as
importing too definite a recognition of national unity, that it was dropped,
and instead there were adopted the words' 0 Lord, bless these United
States.”
There was so little solidarity in the U.S.A. at the time when this
incident occurred that the people of America did not think that they were a
nation. If the people of the United States could not feel that they were a
nation, how difficult it is for Indians to think that they are a nation. I
remember the days when politically- minded Indians, resented the
expression "the people of India." They preferred the expression the Indian
nation." I am of opinion that in believing that we are a nation, we are
cherishing a great delusion. How can people divided into several thousands
of castes be a nation? The sooner we realize that we are not as yet a nation
in the social and psychological sense of the world, the better for us. For then
only we shall realize the necessity of becoming a nation and seriously think
Page339of ways and means of realising the goal. The realization of this goal is going
to be very difficult - far more difficult than it has been in the United States.
The United States has no caste problem. In India there are castes. The castes
are anti-national. In the first place because they bring about separation in
social life. They are anti-national also because they generate jealousy and
antipathy between caste and caste. But we must overcome all these
difficulties if we wish to become a nation in reality. For fraternity can be a
fact only when there is a nation. Without fraternity equality and liberty will
be no deeper than coats of paint.
These are my reflections about the tasks that lie ahead of us. They
may not be very pleasant to some. But there can be no gainsaying that
political power in this country has too long been the monopoly of a few and
the many are only beasts of burden, but also beasts of prey. This monopoly
has not merely deprived them of their chance of betterment; it has sapped
them of what may be called the significance of life. These down-trodden
classes are tired of being governed. They are impatient to govern
themselves. This urge for self-realization in the down-trodden classes must
no be allowed to devolve into a class struggle or class war. It would lead to a
division of the House. That would indeed be a day of disaster. For, as has
been well said by Abraham Lincoln, a House divided against itself cannot
stand very long. Therefore the sooner room is made for the realization of
their aspiration, the better for the few, the better for the country, the
better for the maintenance for its independence and the better for the
continuance of its democratic structure. This can only be done by the
establishment of equality and fraternity in all spheres of life. That is why I
have laid so much Stresses on them.
I do not wish to weary the House any further. Independence is no
doubt a matter of joy. But let us not forget that this independence has
thrown on us great responsibilities. By independence, we have lost the
excuse of blaming the British for anything going wrong. If hereafter’ things
go wrong, we will have nobody to blame. Except ourselves. There is great
danger of things going wrong. Times are fast changing. People including
our own are being moved by new ideologies. They are getting tired of
Government by the people. They are prepared to have Governments for the
people and are indifferent whether it is Government of the people and by
Page340the people. If we wish to preserve the Constitution in which we have sought
to enshrine the principle of Government of the people, for the people and
by the people, let us resolve not to be tardy in the recognition of the evils
that lie across our path and which induce people to prefer Government for
the people to Government by the people, nor to be weak in our initiative to
remove them. That is the only way to serve the country. I know of no
better,
<<<<<<<<<<>>>>>>>>>>